Experiment 1: Installation and Set-up of Natural Language Tool Kit (NLTK)
Aim
To install and set up the Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) library in Python for performing Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks.

Theory
Introduction to NLP
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a branch of Artificial Intelligence that enables computers to understand, interpret, and process human language such as English, Hindi, etc.
Applications of NLP include:


Chatbots


Language translation


Sentiment analysis


Speech recognition


Text summarization


Spam detection



Introduction to NLTK
Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) is one of the most popular Python libraries used for NLP tasks.
It provides:


Easy-to-use interfaces


Text processing libraries


Tokenization tools


Stemming and lemmatization


POS tagging


Parsing


Machine learning support


NLTK is mainly used for:


Educational purposes


Research work


NLP experiments



Features of NLTK


Text Tokenization


Stopword Removal


Stemming and Lemmatization


Part-of-Speech Tagging


Named Entity Recognition


Text Classification


Sentiment Analysis



System Requirements


Python installed in the system


Internet connection for downloading NLTK datasets


Jupyter Notebook / VS Code / PyCharm



Installation Steps
Step 1: Install Python
Download and install Python from:
Python Official Website
Verify installation:
python --version

Step 2: Install NLTK
Open terminal or command prompt and run:
pip install nltk

Step 3: Download NLTK Resources
Run Python shell or Jupyter Notebook:
import nltknltk.download()
A downloader window will appear.
Select packages such as:


punkt


stopwords


wordnet


averaged_perceptron_tagger



Program Code
# Importing NLTK libraryimport nltk# Downloading necessary packagesnltk.download('punkt')# Sample texttext = "Natural Language Processing is interesting."# Tokenizationtokens = nltk.word_tokenize(text)# Display outputprint("Tokens:", tokens)

Output
[nltk_data] Downloading package punkt to ...[nltk_data] Package punkt is already up-to-date!Tokens: ['Natural', 'Language', 'Processing', 'is', 'interesting', '.']

Explanation of the Code
StatementDescriptionimport nltkImports NLTK librarynltk.download('punkt')Downloads tokenizer packageword_tokenize()Splits sentence into wordsprint()Displays tokenized output

Advantages of NLTK


Easy to learn and use


Large collection of NLP tools


Open-source library


Supports research and education


Works well with Python



Applications of NLTK


Chatbots


Text analytics


Email filtering


Language translation


Sentiment analysis


Information retrieval systems



Conclusion
NLTK is a powerful Python library for Natural Language Processing. In this experiment, NLTK was successfully installed and configured, and basic text tokenization was performed.

Learning Outcome
After performing this experiment, students will be able to:


Understand the basics of Natural Language Processing.


Install and configure the NLTK library in Python.


Download and manage NLTK datasets and resources.


Execute basic NLP operations such as tokenization.


Develop a foundation for advanced NLP experiments.

